.. _fts_backend_solr:

Solr FTS Engine
===============

`Solr <https://lucene.apache.org/solr/>`_ is a Lucene indexing server.
Dovecot communicates to it using HTTP/XML queries.

The steps described in this page are tested for Solr 7.7.0. For
other versions, this these steps may need to be adjusted.

Compiling
---------

Dovecot is not compiled with Solr FTS support by default. To enable it,
you need to add the ``--with-solr`` parameter to your invocation of the
``configure`` script. You will also need to have libexpat installed,
including development headers (typically from a separate development
package). Configuration will fail if ``--with-solr`` is enabled while
libexpat headers cannot be found. Older versions of Dovecot also
required libcurl for Solr support, but recent versions of Dovecot
include a custom HTTP client.

Configuration
-------------

Solr Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, the Solr server needs to be installed. Most operating systems
will have packages for this. The latest version can be downloaded and
installed from official website, and here are instructions to install
7.7.0 based on the howto `How to Install Apache Solr 7.5 on Debian
9/8 <https://tecadmin.net/install-apache-solr-on-debian/>`_:

::

   wget https://www-eu.apache.org/dist/lucene/solr/7.7.0/solr-7.7.0.tgz
   tar xzf solr-7.7.0.tgz solr-7.7.0/bin/install_solr_service.sh --strip-components=2
   sudo bash ./install_solr_service.sh solr-7.7.0.tgz

To use Solr with Dovecot, it needs to configured specifically for use
with Dovecot.

::

   sudo -u solr /opt/solr/bin/solr create -c dovecot 

The location of the files for the newly created instance on the
filesystem varies between operating systems and installation methods.
For example, in Archlinux, the config files are located in
``/opt/solr/server/solr/dovecot/conf`` and data files can be found in
``/opt/solr/server/solr/dovecot/data``. When installed from tarball,
these directories can be found in ``/var/solr/data/dovecot/``.

Once the instance is created, you can start Solr. The means of starting,
stopping and querying the status of the ``solr`` service varies between
systems. For systemd, these commands are as follows:

::

   sudo systemctl stop solr
   sudo systemctl start solr
   sudo systemctl status solr

By default, the Solr administation page for the newly created instance
is located at <https://localhost:8983/solr/#/~cores/dovecot>. It
can be used to check the status of the Solr instance. Configuration
errors are often most conveniently viewed here. Solr also writes log
files. For a tarball installation, these can be found at
``/var/solr/logs/``.

Solr Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are three primary configuration files that need to be changed to
accommodate the Dovecot FTS needs: the instance configuration file
``solrconfig.xml`` and the schema files ``schema.xml`` and
``managed-schema`` used by the instance. These files are both located in
the ``conf`` directory of the Solr instance (e.g.,
``/var/solr/data/dovecot/conf/``).

Remove default core configuration files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

   rm -f /var/solr/data/dovecot/conf/schema.xml
   rm -f /var/solr/data/dovecot/conf/managed-schema
   rm -f /var/solr/data/dovecot/conf/solrconfig.xml

Install schema.xml and solrconfig.xml
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Copy
`doc/solr-config-7.7.0.xml <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dovecot/core/master/doc/solr-config-7.7.0.xml>`_
and
`doc/solr-schema-7.7.0.xml <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dovecot/core/master/doc/solr-schema-7.7.0.xml>`_
(Since Dovecot 2.3.6+) to ``/var/solr/data/dovecot/conf/`` as
``solrconfig.xml`` and ``schema.xml``. The ``managed-schema`` file is
generated based on ``schema.xml``.

Dovecot Plugin
--------------

On Dovecot's side add:

Into 10-mail.conf (note add existing plugins to string)

::

   mail_plugins = $mail_plugins fts fts_solr

Into 90-plugins.conf

::

   plugin {
     fts = solr
     fts_solr = url=https://solr.example.org:8983/solr/dovecot/
   }

Fields listed in ``fts_solr`` plugin setting are space separated. They
can contain:

-  url=<solr url> : Required base URL for Solr. (remember to add your
   core name if using solr 7+ : "/solr/dovecot/"). The default URL for
   Solr 7+ is <https://localhost:8983/solr/dovecot>

-  debug : Enable HTTP debugging. Writes to debug log.

-  break-imap-search : Use Solr also for indexing TEXT and BODY
   searches. This makes your server non-IMAP-compliant. (This is always
   enabled in v2.1+, and removed since v2.3+ as it's default behaviour)

-  rawlog_dir=<directory> : For debugging, store HTTP exchanges between
   Dovecot and Solr in this directory. (2.3.6+)

-  batch_size : Configure the number of mails sent in single requests to
   Solr, default is 1000. (2.3.6+)

   -  with fts_autoindex=yes, each new mail gets separately indexed on
      arrival, so batch_size only matters when doing the initial
      indexing of a mailbox.

   -  with fts_autoindex=no, new mails don't get indexed on arrival, so
      batch_size is used when indexing gets triggered.

-  soft_commit=yes|no : Control whether new mails are immediately
   searchable via Solr, default to yes. When using no, it's important to
   set autoCommit or autoSoftCommit time in solrconfig.xml so mails
   eventually become searchable. (2.3.6+)

Important notes:

-  Some mail clients will not submit any search requests for certain
   fields if they index things locally eg. Thunderbird will not send any
   requests for fields such as sender/recipients/subject when Body is
   not included as this data is contained within the local index.

Solr commits & optimization
---------------------------

Solr indexes should be optimized once in a while to make searches faster
and to remove space used by deleted mails. Dovecot never asks Solr to
optimize, so you should do this yourself. Perhaps a cronjob that sends
the optimize-command to Solr every n hours.

With v2.2.3+ Dovecot only does soft commits to the Solr index to improve
performance. You must run a hard commit once in a while or Solr will
keep increasing its transaction log sizes. For example send the commit
command to Solr every few minutes.

::

   # Optimize should be run somewhat rarely, e.g. once a day
   curl https://<hostname/ip>:<port|default 8983>/solr/dovecot/update?optimize=true
   # Commit should be run pretty often, e.g. every minute
   curl https://<hostname/ip>:<port|default 8983>/solr/dovecot/update?commit=true

You may not need those if you are using a recent Solr (7+) or SolrCloud.
The default configuration of Solr is to auto-commit every once in a
while (~15sec) so commit is not necessary. Also, the default
TieredMergePolicy in Solr will automatically purge removed documents later, 
so optimize is not necessary.

Re-index mailbox
----------------

If you require to force dovecot to reindex a whole mailbox you can run
the command shown, this will only take action when a search is done and
will apply to the whole mailbox.

::

   doveadm fts rescan -u <username>

If you want to index a single mailbox/all mailboxes you can run the
command shown, this will happen immediately and will block until the
action is completed.

::

   doveadm index [-u <user>|-A] [-S <socket_path>] [-q] [-n <max recent>] <mailbox mask>

Sorting by relevancy
--------------------

Solr/Lucene supports returning a relevancy score for search results. If
you want to sort the search results by the score, use Dovecot's
non-standard X-SCORE sort key:

::

   1 SORT (X-SCORE) UTF-8 <search parameters>

Indexes
-------

Dovecot creates the following fields:

-  id: Unique ID consisting of uid/uidv/user/box.

   -  Note that your user names really shouldn't contain '/' character.

-  uid: Message's IMAP UID.

-  uidv: Mailbox's UIDVALIDITY. This changes if mailbox gets recreated.

-  box: Mailbox name

-  user: User name who owns the mailbox, or empty for public namespaces

-  hdr: Indexed message headers

-  body: Indexed message body

-  any: "Copy field" from hdr and body, i.e. searching based on this
   will search from both headers and bodies.

Lucene does duplicate suppression based on the "id" field, so even if
Dovecot sends the same message multiple times to Solr it gets indexed
only once. This might happen currently if multiple searches are started
at the same time.

You might want to build a cronjob to go through the Lucene indexes once
in a while to delete indexed messages (or entire mailboxes) that no
longer exist on the filesystem. It shouldn't normally find any such
messages though.

Testing
-------

::

   # telnet localhost imap
   * OK [CAPABILITY IMAP4rev1 LITERAL+ SASL-IR LOGIN-REFERRALS ID ENABLE IDLE SORT SORT=DISPLAY THREAD=REFERENCES THREAD=REFS MULTIAPPEND UNSELECT CHILDREN NAMESPACE UIDPLUS LIST-EXTENDED I18NLEVEL=1 ESEARCH ESORT SEARCHRES WITHIN CONTEXT=SEARCH LIST-STATUS STARTTLS AUTH=PLAIN AUTH=LOGIN] I am ready.
   1 login username password
   2 select Inbox
   3 SEARCH text "test"

Sharding
--------

If you have more users than fit into a single Solr box, you can split
users off to different servers. A couple of different ways you could do
it are:

-  Have some HTTP proxy redirecting the connections based on the URL

-  Configure Dovecot's userdb lookup to return a different host for
   ``fts_solr`` setting using :ref:`authentication-user_database_extra_fields`.

   -  LDAP:
      ``user_attrs = ..., solrHost=fts_solr=url=https://%$:8983/solr/dovecot/``

   -  MySQL:
      ``user_query = SELECT concat('url=https://', solr_host, ':8983/solr/dovecot/') AS fts_solr, ...``

You can also use
`SolrCloud <https://lucene.apache.org/solr/guide/7_6/solrcloud.html>`_,
the clustered version of Solr, that allows you to scale up, and adds
failover / high availability to your FTS system. Dovecot-solr works fine
with a SolrCloud cluster as long as the solr schema is the right one.

External Tutorials
------------------

External sites with tutorials on using Solr under Dovecot

-  `Installing Apache Solr with Dovecot for fulltext search results
   (ATmail support
   guide) <https://help.atmail.com/hc/en-us/articles/201566404-Installing-Apache-Solr-with-Dovecot-for-fulltext-search-results>`_

-  FreeBSD: <https://mor-pah.net/2016/08/15/dovecot-2-2-with-solr-6-or-5/>

-  Substring searches with ngrams:
   <https://dovecot.org/list/dovecot/2011-May/059338.html>

Tips
----

Some additional things which might help you configuring Solr search:

-  If you are using Tomcat: Set ``maxHttpHeaderSize="65536"`` (connector
   definition for port 8080 in ``/etc/tomcat7/server.xml``) to accept
   long search query strings (iPhones tend to send multi-kilobyte-sized
   queries)

-  Set ``df`` to ``hdr`` in ``/etc/solr/conf/solrconfig.xml``
   (``/select`` request handler) to avoid strange
   ``undefined field text`` errors.

-  Please keep in mind that you will have to change the Solr URL to
   include the core name (ie: ``dovecot``:
   ``https://localhost:8939/solr/dovecot``).
