.. _s3_storages:

======================
S3-compatible Storages
======================

Supported providers
-------------------

For Dovecot Pro edition, only AWS S3 is officially supported.
Please see :ref:`amazon_s3`.

This document covers the S3 compatible storage services, which are not supported.

.. code-block:: none

   # Basic configuration:
   fs s3 {
     fs_s3_url = https://ACCESSKEY:SECRET@s3.example.com/
   }

Bucket name
-----------

There are two ways to specify the bucket name:

 * path-style: S3 requests' path begins with the :dovecot_plugin:ref:`fs_s3_bucket`
   setting. For example ``fs_s3_bucket=BUCKETNAME`` will result in requests
   looking like ``https://s3.example.com/BUCKETNAME/object-path``
 * virtual-hosted-style: The first subdomain in the URL specifies the bucket.
   AWS supports only this style for new buckets. For example
   For example ``https://BUCKETNAME.s3.example.com``

.. _fs-s3:

S3 Settings
-----------

See also :ref:`fs-http`.

.. dovecot_plugin:setting_filter:: fs_s3
   :filter: fs_s3
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @named_filter

   Filter for S3-specific settings.


.. dovecot_plugin:setting:: fs_s3_url
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @string

   URL for accessing the S3 storage. For example
   ``https://BUCKETNAME.s3.example.com``.


.. dovecot_plugin:setting:: fs_s3_region
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @string

   Specify region name for AWS S3 bucket. When this is specified, Dovecot
   starts using v4 signatures. (The default is to use v2 signatures.)


.. dovecot_plugin:setting:: fs_s3_auth_host
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @string
   :default: 169.254.169.254

   AWS IAM hostname. Normally there is no reason to change this. This is
   mainly intended for testing.


.. dovecot_plugin:setting:: fs_s3_auth_port
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @uint
   :default: 80

   AWS IAM port. Normally there is no reason to change this. This is
   mainly intended for testing.


.. dovecot_plugin:setting:: fs_s3_auth_role
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @string

   If not empty, perform AWS IAM lookup using this role name.
   See :ref:`aws_iam` for details.


.. dovecot_plugin:setting:: fs_s3_bucket
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @string

   S3 bucket name added to the request path.


.. dovecot_plugin:setting:: fs_s3_bulk_delete_limit
   :plugin: obox
   :values: @uint
   :default: 1000

   Number of deletes supported within the same bulk delete request. 0 disables
   bulk deletes.

.. _s3_http_settings:

Default HTTP Settings
---------------------

fs-s3 overrides some of the default HTTP client settings:

 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_max_idle_time` = 1s
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_max_parallel_connections` = 10
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_max_connect_attempts` = 3
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_request_max_redirects` = 2
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_request_max_attempts` = 5
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_connect_backoff_max_time` = 1s
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_user_agent` = Dovecot/VERSION
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_connect_timeout` = 5s
 * :dovecot_core:ref:`http_client_request_timeout` = 10s

You can override these and any other HTTP client or SSL settings by placing
them inside :dovecot_plugin:ref:`fs_s3` named filter.

.. _s3_example_configuration:

S3 Example Configuration
------------------------

Below is the configuration for a generic S3 storage. See :ref:`amazon_s3` for
AWS S3 specific example configurations.

.. code-block:: none

   mail_driver = obox
   mail_path = %8Mu/%u
   fs_s3_url = https://ACCESSKEY:SECRET@s3.example.com/
   fs_s3_bucket = mails
   fs_s3_region = region
   fs_s3_auth_role = s3access
   fs_compress_write_method = zstd
   obox {
     fs fscache {
       fs_fscache_size = 512M
       fs_fscache_path = /var/cache/mails/%4Nu
     }
     fs compress {
     }
     fs s3 {
     }
   }
   metacache {
     fs compress {
     }
     fs s3 {
     }
   }
   fts_dovecot {
     fs fts-cache {
     }
     fs fscache {
       fs_fscache_size = 512M
       fs_fscache_path = /var/cache/fts/%4Nu
     }
     fs compress {
     }
     fs s3 {
       fs_s3_url = https://ACCESSKEY:SECRET@s3.example.com/%8Mu/%u/fts/
     }
   }

We'll use the first 8 characters of the hex representation of the MD5 hash of
the username at the beginning of each object path. This is called *dispersion
prefix* and is used by (at least) AWS S3 and GCS S3 to internally perform
sharding and allow disk IO to scale.

S3 storage requirements
-----------------------

It's important that the S3 storage has an efficient way to list objects with
a given prefix. Copying performance is also important. Many S3 storages either
don't implement the listing at all, or it's only used for disaster recovery
type of purposes to list all objects. If this is the case, you can still use
the storage together with :ref:`dictmap_configuration`. See especially the
:dovecot_plugin:ref:`fs_dictmap_storage_objectid_prefix` and
:dovecot_plugin:ref:`fs_dictmap_storage_passthrough_paths` settings.

Google Cloud Storage
--------------------

GCS is similar to AWS in that a "dispersion prefix" is required to properly
shard among the Google Cloud storage nodes. Google has provided verification
that 6 characters of dispersion prefix is "enough distribution to ensure access
to pretty massive resources on our side without gymnastics on our end."

Deleting multiple objects per request
-------------------------------------

  .. dovecotadded:: 2.3.10

The S3 drivers support bulk-delete requests. The
:dovecot_plugin:ref:`fs_s3_bulk_delete_limit` setting is enabled by default to delete up
to 1000 keys with one request. To actually delete that many mails in a single
request, you must also set :dovecot_plugin:ref:`obox_max_parallel_deletes`:

.. code-block:: none

     obox_max_parallel_deletes = 1000

This value should be the same as :dovecot_plugin:ref:`fs_s3_bulk_delete_limit` or lower.
