==============
Debugging tips
==============

Debug pre-auth IMAP with libexec/dovecot/imap
=============================================

The imap executable can be started in IMAP PREAUTH mode. This
circumvents login and authorization and lets you connect to the
imap process directly, without having to go through the imap-login
process.
Start imap in PREAUTH with one of:

.. code-block:: sh

   /usr/libexec/dovecot/imap -u <username>
   src/imap/imap -u <username>
   doveadm exec imap -u <username>

This also works for pop3 and managesieve. lmtp can also be started from
command line without the -u parameter (because the recipient is given
with RCPT TO command).

Debug pre-auth IMAP with a real client
--------------------------------------

1. Run the following script

.. code-block:: sh

        rm -f /tmp/f && mkfifo /tmp/f && \
        cat /tmp/f | ./imap -u testuser | nc -l 127.0.0.1 143 > /tmp/f


2. Connect to port 143 with the imap client of your choice

3. Attach with gdb to the running imap process, if you so wish.
   This can also be used together with imaptest, if you define
   imaptest to use only one username. Some configurations or use
   cases might require dovecot to be running (e.g. for
   authentication). In those cases, select a different port for
   "nc" or change dovecot not to listen on 143.

Debug most/some dovecot executables inside the source tree.
===========================================================

To avoid having to make install dovecot before running an executable in
gdb or valgrind, use libtool. For example:

``libtool e gdb --args src/imap/imap``

Maybe add a helpful alias to your ``.bashrc`` or similar:

``alias lgdb='libtool --mode=execute gdb'``

Debug dovecot master
====================

``GDB=1 gdb --args dovecot -F``

Start with -F = foreground mode.

If you've compiled --with-devel-checks, GDB=1 environment needs to be
set so it doesn't fail when it detects extra "leaked" file descriptors.

Standalone non-root debugging environments
==========================================

Dovecot can be instructed to run the imap handler as a non-root user,
and therefore that binary can be debugged by that same non-root user. At
the moment, only manual (telnet) interaction is possible. This setup is
documented in https://wiki.dovecot.org/HowTo/Rootless /
http://wiki.dovecot.net/SelfContainedTestEnvironments

Disabling optimizations
=======================

gdb can be difficult if code is compiled with optimizations (-O2).
Printing variables may fail and stepping over code can jump confusingly
all over the place. The easiest way to avoid this is to just disable
optimizations either for Dovecot entirely or just some files:

-  Globally: ``EXTRA_CFLAGS=-O0 ./configure ...``

-  Within a directory: Remove -O2 from CFLAGS in Makefile

   -  Edit/touch some .c file(s) in the directory to recompile, or make
      clean to rebuild everything in the directory

If you want to just select a few functions to be built with -O0, then
create 2 files, src/lib/optimise-off.h and src/lib/options-restore.h as
follows:

.. code-block:: C

        #if defined(__GNUC__)
        #if (__GNUC__ > 4) || ((__GNUC__ == 4) && (__GNUC_MINOR__ > 4))
        #pragma GCC push_options
        #pragma GCC optimize (0)
        #else
        #warning GCC not new enough to support local optimisation pragmas
        #endif
        #endif

and

.. code-block:: C

         #if defined(__GNUC__)
         #if (__GNUC__ > 4) || ((__GNUC__ == 4) && (__GNUC_MINOR__ > 4))
         #pragma GCC pop_options
         #else
         /* He already knows */
         #endif
         #endif

Then just use #include those files around just the functions you want
un-optimised.

Another dirty and quick way to opt out the optimization is to use pragma
to quote the code.

.. code-block:: C

        #pragma GCC push_options
        #pragma GCC optimize ("O0")
         .... code
        #pragma GCC pop_options

Debugging core dumps in other systems
=====================================

You need the core dump, the binary that produced it and ALL the shared
libraries on the system. For example:

.. code-block:: sh

        binary=/usr/libexec/dovecot/imap
        core=/var/core/core.12345
        dest=core.tar.gz
        (echo "info shared"; sleep 1) |
        gdb $binary $core |
        grep '^0x.*/' | sed 's,^[^/]*,,' |
        xargs tar czf $dest --dereference $binary $core

In v2.3.10+ there is dovecot-sysreport script that can do the same (and
more):

``dovecot-sysreport --core <binary> <core>``

There's also http://dovecot.org/tools/core-tar.sh

Usage: ``./core-tar.sh <binary> <core> <dest.tar.gz>``

Debugging on the test server then ideally would have all the debuginfo
packages (for exactly the same binaries). You can run gdb there with:

.. code-block:: sh

        mkdir coretest
        cd coretest
        tar xzf ../core.tar.gz
        gdb imap
        set solib-absolute-prefix .
        core imap.core
        bt full

Debugging core dumps in other systems: Installing rpms in different distribution
================================================================================

If you have a tar.gz generated from dovecot-sysreport, you can debug it
in any Linux distribution. But you still need to have the Dovecot
debuginfo packages installed globally, which could be a bit tricky. With
yum based systems you can setup /etc/yum.repos.d/dovecot.repo pointing
to the repository you want according to
https://doc.dovecot.org/installation_guide/dovecot_pro_releases/. Then
you can install the packages easily with:

``rpm -Uvh --nodeps $(repoquery --location dovecot-ee-debuginfo)``

Scripting gdb for getting backtrace from many core dumps
========================================================

When you have tens of core dumps, it's getting a bit troublesome to
manually get the backtraces. Here's a script that takes a number of
dovecot-sysreport-*.tar.gz files as parameters and
creates dovecot-sysreport-*.tar.bt output files for them:

.. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash -e

        for fname in $*; do
          mkdir tmp-gdb
          cd tmp-gdb
          tar xzf ../$fname
          core_path=$(find . -name '*core*')
          # FIXME: handles only libexec files - should also support doveadm at least
          binary_name=$(file $core_path \| grep "dovecot/" \| sed "s/^.*from 'dovecot\/\([^']*\).*$/\1/")
          cat <<EOF | gdb usr/libexec/dovecot/$binary_name > ../$fname.bt
        set pagination off
        set solib-absolute-prefix .
        core $core_path
        bt full
        quit
        EOF
          cd ..
          rm -rf tmp-gdb
        done
